---
x: "38"
y: "50"
title : "River to Table"
description: "Hyas is a Hugo-powered Jamstack framework for building production-ready websites faster."
lead: "Hyas is a Hugo-powered Jamstack framework for building production-ready websites faster."
date: 2020-04-17T12:18:10+00:00
lastmod: 2020-04-17T12:18:10+00:00
draft: false
images: []
---
Map Location 
[describe map location or nearby feature]
Introduction
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet…
Body
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet…

Fish provide an important protein source for many humans and Bighead and Silver carp are particularly high in coveted Omega-3s while having low mercury levels.  The language of the Illinois Department of Natural Resource’s (IDNR) Bounty Program and its “targeted harvest” hardly suggest happy coexistence, but its costs fall well beneath ACE’s prevention technologies and include more beneficiaries.  By paying fishermen for their time and allowing them individual profit from their haul, IDNR made netting carp a lucrative prospect.  Between 2010 and 2017,  the program pulled 5.5 million pounds of carp from the upper Illinois River.  Building on this success, a new threshold aimed to remove 1 million pounds a year from the upper Illinois and 15 million pounds from its lower span.  In calendar year 2020, 2,882,725 pounds of carp were removed from the Illinois River and directed to a new processing plant on the banks. Through September 2021, fishermen caught an additional 2,450,451 pounds.
In the summer of 2021, many of the carp curious signed up for an Illinois Department of Natural Resources zoom event to bequeath a new name on the reviled Asian Carp.  Inspired by earlier name changes like Slimehead to Orange Roughy or Patagonian Toothfish to Chilean Sea Bass, the move aimed to open markets for the increasingly carp-laden hauls of Illinois fishermen.  But the Illinois Department of Natural Resources seemed to balk before the modern task of branding, turning to a Chicago Graphic Designer to help with carp’s social rebirth.  The rollout of Copi, a name focused on the copiousness of the fish and their nutritional benefits, occurred in June 2022 
with the hope that it can now overcome its “name based perception issue.” 
Robert Hirschfeld, Senior Water Policy Specialist at Prairie Rivers Network, has always understood the influx of invasive species as symptom, rather than cause, of the “sacrifice zone” along the Des Plaines River that includes a massive tar sands refining complex.  More than an issue of perception, Hirschfeld diagnoses a larger malady of degraded rivers hostile to fish habitats and wonders why the commercial act of rebranding absorbed $600,000 from a strapped state agency with the authority to stem contaminants and rehabilitate rivers.  “If our rivers were understood and managed to be more than agricultural drainage and shipping lanes, the ecological balance would not tilt so heavily in favor of invasive carp at the expense of native species,” he wrote in response to the Copi rollout. My gloss on Hirschfeld’s critique is that we would do well to stop propping up a 19th century canal and begin attending to the viability of our rivers.
I had a chance to taste the fish in its pre-Copi days at a fall 2019 banquet held at Southern Illinois University’s Touch of Nature lodge. The “Asian Carp Convivial” formed part of artists Sara Lewison and Andrew S. Yang’s project centered on what they call “a Postnatural Fish.” On my way to the meal, I passed Lewison and Yang’s billboards that read “Eat the River, Heal the River (Asian Carp: Nutritious and Hecka Delicious) and declaring them a “Midwest Superfood.”  In light of the COVID-19 pandemic that we didn’t see coming, I harbor particularly fond memories of the long hall in the forest where tables were lined with original Lewison and Yang fishtory placemats and boisterous folks having their first taste of the infamous fish.  The filets that we folded into tacos had been prepared by Fin Fishery, a Kentucky based company whose owners produce a range of products from carp.  They see the sudden influx of fish as offering people a chance to enjoy catch from the wild while helping to heal rivers overrun by channels of commercial exchange that have depleted their ecosystems.  In the spirit of healing, the fishery also hires formally incarcerated people to process the fish and make the products, giving them a second chance where other businesses close the door. 